This is a chronicle.
I have $18,000.
Okay, so this is not enough.
$18,000.
$20,000.
At the back.
$22,000.
$24,000.
$24,000 now.
And $24,000.
Anymore than $24,000.
$26,000.
$28,000.
$30,000.
$32,000.
$35,000.
$38,000.
Any more now than $38,000.
I'm just going to leave this, sir.
Really?
I have $1,000.
$1,000.
$1,000 off, $1,700, $1,200, thank you, $1,300, $1,400, $1,500, $1,600, $1,700, $1,800, $1,900, $2,000, $2,000, $2,000, $2,200, $2,400, thank you, $2,600, $2,800, $3,000, $3,500, $3,800, $3,000, $4,200,
$4,500.
$4,800.
$4,800 now on the right.
Any more than $4,800.
$4,800 is worth you at $4,800.
$300, thank you.
There's only been about two lights that didn't meet their reserve.
$5,500 to start this step.
On the three copies, the writer's copy.
$55,000 $60,000 $65,000 $75,000 $75,000 $80,000 $85,000 $85,000 $90,000 $95,000 $95,000 $95,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
$100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000 $100,000
$2,000, standing in the tank at $2,000.
At $2,000, standing at the back, $2,000.
All done then at $2,000, any more now than $2,000.
Heritage, 522.
Headlock number 68, Tyrion.
I have...
$7,000 to start this day, $7,000 to start at $7,000, any more now than $7,000, any more than $7,000, $7,500, thank you, $7,500, on the third telephone, $7,500, at $7,500, on the third telephone, $7,500, any more now than $7,500, at $7,500, last call at $7,500.
Thank you very much.
Lot number 69, the Turbo Blonde of Paris, I have $2,200 to start it.
$2,200 to start it now, $2,500, $2,800.
The third guy up on the wall, this is the head of South Beach's books.
It's David Redman's house.
He's at all.
At $4,000.
At $4,000, any more now than $4,000.
At $4,000, it's 521.
Thank you.
Just kidding.
Yeah, this is exciting.
How you doing?
Good.
And lot number 70, Valentini.
Lots of interest in this, and three bids, and I must start the bidding at $4,500.
$4,500.
Make an extra $4,500.
$5,055.
$6,000.
In the center at $6,000.
At $6,000.
In the middle at $6,000.
Any more than $6,000 now.
At $6,000.
You're all done.
$6,000.
Till 523.
Look at this up here.
These guys are getting ready.
Lot number 71, the veterinary manuscript.
What's your guess?
$850.
$950.
$1,100.
$1,200.
$1,300.
$1,300, still with me at $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300, $1,300,
Over here, over here.
$2,200, $2,500, $2,500, thank you.
$2,500, $2,600, $2,800 now.
$2,800 stole my letter at $2,800.
$2,800 will be all done at $2,800.
Thank you.
Here we go.
Showtime.
Do you hear the hush, the hum?
And now we'll move to the second catalogue in the morning.
I hope everyone's got it.
is the sum of the final bid plus the buyer's premium and all applicable sales or use taxes.
Bidders should note that the auctioneer may open bidding off the Leonardo da Vinci Codex hammer by placing a bid on behalf of the seller.
I, as the auctioneer, may continue to bid on behalf of the seller up to the amount of the reserve, either by placing consecutive bids or by placing bids in response to other bidders.
Another note I alluded to earlier.
Please note that Christie's is selling this lot as agent for an organization holding a state of New York exempt organization certificate.
Accordingly, no sales tax is due on the purchase price of any of this lot if it's picked up or delivered in the state of New York.
However, the sales or use tax is due from the buyer if the lot is shipped to New Jersey or Connecticut or any of the following states where Christie's maintains offices.
California, Florida, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Texas, and Washington, D.C.
There we are.
We have seen this before.
Leonardo da Vinci Codex Hammer.
$5,500 to start.
$5.5 million.
That was wonderful.
That was good.
Still with me then.
$5,500,000.
$5,800,000.
$6,000,000.
$6,500,000.
$7,000,000.
$5,500,000.
$8,000,000.
$9,000,000.
$10 million.
At $10 million, and he hunted me at $10 million.
At $10 million, $10 million.
$12 million.
In the room, $12 million.
On the front.
$13 million on the telephone.
$14 million.
In this room, at $14 million.
At $14 million in this room, at $15 million on the telephone.
$16 million.
At $16 million, $17 million.
The last telephone, 18 million.
And 18 million in this room.
19 million on the telephone.
19 million, 500,000.
I'll be happy to take.
Next bit is 20.
20 million.
20 million, 500,000.
Thank you.
21 million.
21 million, 500,000.
Jesus Christ.
Twenty-two million.
At twenty-two million, twenty-two million five hundred thousand in this room at twenty-two million five hundred thousand.
Twenty-three million.
At twenty-three million dollars on the telephone, twenty-three million five hundred thousand in this room.
In this room at twenty-three million five hundred thousand, twenty-four million on the telephone.
Twenty-five million.
At 25 million in this room.
26 million.
27 million.
28 million.
At 28 million dollars, it's away from the room now on the telephone at 28 million dollars.
At 28 million dollars, it's on the last telephone at 28 million dollars.
I'll give everyone time, it's with you at 28 million dollars.
Any more?
28 million dollars then.
In this room, on the telephone rather, at 28 million dollars.
On the telephone in this room at 28 million dollars.
Last call, 28 million.
Thank you.
And we want to check the different elements, right?
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
27 milioni di dollari sono una più enorme, erano 42 milioni di dollari.
Lei era del portavozio di Nascordani?
No, no.
Era nostra organizzazione, non solo io, a rappresentare la Fondazione Cari, che aveva intenzione di partecipare seriamente all'iniziativa,
And, of course, in the field of its institutional goals, it was also hoped to win.
This time it was not a better, but we hope that it would be better.
Thank you.
No.
his job institutional, he intended not to lose this opportunity to have in Italy the Codice Leonardo.
Unfortunately, it was not so.
We have to take care of this reality, of this result, without abandoning too much
commenti di dispiacere certamente che se fosse andata positivamente sarebbe stata di grande soddisfazione i concorrenti erano troppo forti 28 milioni di dollari beh tutto è relativo non sono i 28 milioni di dollari
Thank you.
No, I think it's Italy we'll see yeah 20 now
Okay, sorry.
This is exciting.
I've never seen this report.
How are you doing?
Good morning.
incredible price for this incredible, can't really say a word at the moment, it's a word at the moment.
The manuscript supports two and a half types, more than any manuscript has taught in the past.
Two and a half, I'll complete this record for the manuscript.
It's pledged his pride as an enormous private collector, being against, as you saw in the book, the Calico Foundation,
We're getting no audio.
The press is getting no audio.
Sorry.
I thought it was a press conference, sorry.
Thank you.
The extraordinary price of just over $30 million achieved for what was until today, the Hammer Codex, soon to be renamed, all for the incredible record price, two and a half times the record, the previous record for any manuscript,
certainly the highest price for any work of art certainly anywhere in this year and indeed in the last four years at auction it was bought by an anonymous private collector bidding against the underbid of the Carriglo Foundation from the land supported by the Carriglo Bank who were the spirited underbidders in the room as I say it's bought by an anonymous private collector
for this absolutely extraordinary and sensational price.
We'd be happy to later on take care of your questions.
I should introduce standing next to me to Steve Massey, the head of our book department, who was the auctioneer, and who had so much to do with the success of today's sale, having toured this great work of art around the world, to Europe, to Southeast Asia,
um and two parts of this country before the sale uh in in a major logistic campaign um bringing bringing it to buyers in all parts of the world um and obviously uh that game campaign was successful um as we all saw in this triumphantly successful sale this morning and do you want to say a word or two um
I'd just like to say that I'd be happy to answer any sort of technical questions.
It's obviously a, it's an amazing morning for me, for our region office here at Christie's worldwide.
Perhaps I would like to say that it's, it shouldn't be entirely a surprise, it's just an incredibly difficult thing to estimate based on its previous appearance, which was only, after all, 15 years or 14 years ago.
Any questions?
Yes.
Could you tell me which gentleman actually did the bidding on the board?
Yes, I can.
This gentleman did the bidding.
And what was his name and his child did it?
Well, that's why I just made a first statement.
I'm Alessandro Ganassi.
I'm a member of the... Could you tell us for it, Alessandro Ganassi?
I'm a member of the board, though.
who was a member of the board, and the Caracol Foundation participated in this auction with the support of the Caracol Foundation and the Chairman of the Bank of the City of Mexico.
We thought, and I believe, that the amendment in chief belongs to our sort of cultural heritage, and particularly to Guadalajara, a part of which we could receive, and obviously we wanted to bring it back that way.
Unfortunately for, I think, I don't find a piece of art.
Actually, it's not all about the piece of art, it's much more.
I think we tried the art and all of a sudden we're going to be disappointed.
Thank you.
Could you just tell us how to spell your name?
I would like to say thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, can you tell us if the collector is American, European, Asian?
Can you tell us if it's a collector who was born?
I can't tell you anything more than that.
I can't tell anyone who's new to the market.
Will it be viewable by the people, by the public?
Which member of your stock has been for it?
Do you want to install that for you?
How many people did you take?
I took bits from two, I took bits from two, I took bits from two, I took bits from two.
That's it.
Just two?
I may be the only one who doesn't know, but perhaps you could quickly summarize the main differences between this one and the other two.
This codex and the other two.
Well, the second thing we were competing against was the Gospels of Henry the Lion, which is an illuminated manuscript.
That was sold for $11.7 million.
No, I mean there are two other codexes by Leonardo that the Italians own, apparently.
No, I think there are many more.
But there's a lot of manuscript material in Italy just as there is in Great Britain There could be none in America if the anonymous fire is not in America
This manuscript was worth £2 million in 1980.
It's worth $30 million now.
Isn't this price quite mad?
No, I would have thought it's not, because it actually fetched $5.6 million in 1980.
And if you bought anything in 1980, nearly $6 million, I would have thought you might be getting up to $28 million now.
as i said earlier the difficulty with this manuscript was that in 1980 it was much more characterized in the marketing as a work of art now we characterize it as a manuscript work of science and as such it's got um there's a great deal of difficulty attached to the valuations of the estimating of it and that was why i
Well because the
Because we last sold it in 1990.
I didn't because I didn't.
I mean, our firm did, but it was handled by the picture department as opposed to the manuscript department.
Why the change?
Fair question.
Why was it handled differently?
Because this time around, it was given to the manuscript department.
Any details on the other on the figures?
No, you have the only figures.
Let me look to read it.
Thank you all very much indeed.